- Internet Access Technologies
Home users, remote workers, and small offices typically require a connection to an ISP to access the internet.

popular choices include broadband cable, broadband digital subscriber line (DSL), wireless WANs, and mobile services.

SPs offer business-class interconnections. Popular business-class services include business DSL, leased lines, and Metro Ethernet.

---

- Home and Small Office Internet Connections
Cable:  It provides a high bandwidth, high availability, and an always-on connection to the internet.
DSL: high bandwidth, high availability, and an always-on connection to the internet.
Cellular:
Satellite:
Dail-up Telephone:
---

- Businesses Internet Connections
Dedicated Leased Line:
Metro Ethernet:
Business DSL:
Satellite:
---

- The Converging Network

Traditional Separate Networks:  Multiple services ran on multiple networks.
Converged Networks: Converged data networks carry multiple services on one network.

---

+++

--- 
Reliable Networks
-Network Architecture:

reliability means more than your connection to the internet. 

The term network architecture, in this context, refers to the technologies that support the infrastructure and the programmed services and rules, or protocols, that move data across the network.

there are four basic characteristics that network architects must address to meet user expectations:
Fault Tolerance
Scalability
Quality of Service (QoS)
Security

- Fault Tolerance:

A fault tolerant network is one that limits the number of affected devices during a failure. 
Implementing a packet-switched network is one way that reliable networks provide redundancy. 

- Scalability:

A scalable network expands quickly to support new users and applications. 
It does this without degrading the performance of services that are being accessed by existing users.

- Quality of Service:

QoS becomes a primary mechanism for managing congestion and ensuring reliable delivery of content to all users.

Congestion occurs when the demand for bandwidth exceeds the amount available. 

Network bandwidth is measured in the number of bits that can be transmitted in a single second, or bits per second (bps).

the router can manage the flow of data and voice traffic, giving priority to voice communications if the network experiences congestion.The focus of QoS is to prioritize time-sensitive traffic. 

- Network Security

Network administrators must address two types of network security concerns: network infrastructure security and information security.

Securing the network infrastructure includes physically securing devices that provide network connectivity and preventing unauthorized access to the management software that resides on them.

In order to achieve the goals of network security, there are three primary requirements.

Confidentiality: 

Integrity:

Availability:

---
Network Trends

- Recent Trends

There are several networking trends that affect organizations and consumers:

Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)
Online collaboration
Video communications
Cloud Computing

- Bring Your Own Device (BYOD)

BYOD enables end users the freedom to use personal tools to access information and communicate across a business or campus network

These include laptops, notebooks, tablets, smart phones, and e-readers.

BYOD means any device, with any ownership, used anywhere.

- Online Collaboration

Collaboration is defined as “the act of working with another or others on a joint project.” Collaboration tools, like Cisco WebEx.

Cisco Webex Teams is a multifunctional collaboration tool that lets you send instant messages to one or more people, post images, and post videos and links. Each team ‘space’ maintains a history of everything that is posted there.

- Video Communications

Video conferencing is a powerful tool for communicating with others, both locally and globally. 
Video is becoming a critical requirement for effective collaboration as organizations extend across geographic and cultural boundaries.

- Video - Cisco Webex for Huddles

- Cloud Computing

Cloud computing is possible because of data centers.








